update language docs with some background/context (#2866)
brimdata/zed: docs/language/README.md

other query languages where the pipeline begins with a search and further
processing is then performed on the isolated data, one of Zed's
strengths is that searches and expressions can appear in any order in the
pipeline.

![Example Zed 2](images/example-zed-operator-search.png)

A complete list of [Zed operators](#operators) is found below.

## Background

An ambitious goal of the Zed project is to offer a language
&mdash; the _Zed language_ &mdash;
that provides an easy learning curve and a gentle slope from simple keyword search
to log-search-style processing and ultimately to sophisticated, large-scale
warehouse-scale queries.  The language also embraces a rich set of type operators
based on the [Zed data model](../formats/zson.md) for data shaping
to provide flexible and easy ETL.

The simplest Zed program is perhaps a single word search, e.g.,
```
widget
```
This program searches the implied input for Zed records that
contain the string "widget".

> NOTE: we should clarify keyword search vs substring match.

As with the unix shell and legacy log search systems,
the Zed language embraces a _pipeline_ model where a source of data

> is treated as a stream then one or more operators concatenated with

Author: and wihtout then

the `|` symbol transform, filter, and aggregate the stream, e.g.,
```
widget | price > 1000
```

> That said, the Zed language is declarative and

Reviewer: @nwt: I know you said you don't feel strongly, but I'll explain why I included it. One of the things @mccanne and I discussed offline about this this revision is that this intro text is more academic than our materials have been in the past. This seems fine, especially considering that some of the audiences we want to reach going forward are indeed more academic in nature. That said, we still have legacy users that may have learned what they know the language via the clicky features in Brim that effectively write it for them. If they follow the docs link in the app because they want to learn to do a new operation that's only _slightly_ more advanced than what they've already done, I get nervous if the first page they read gives the impression of "you must be _\<this>_ academic to ride the Zed ride". While almost all citizens at this point are conditioned to do web searches of unfamiliar terms, in keeping with the promise of a "gentle slope" learning curve, I felt like providing links for the more academic terms is a friendly gesture to these readers since it points them directly at resources should they want to keep climbing the slope. For me, a word like "declarative" is particularly tricky because it's generic enough that if a user just does a web search for it, the first hits they find may not be the ones that explain it in the context that relates to how it's used in Zed.

I'm absolutely open to swapping out the links to destinations deemed superior to Wikipedia.

the Zed compiler optimizes the data flow computation

> &mdash; e.g., implementing a Zed program often differently than

Author: this changes the meaning.  often is modifying differently here.  the compiler _always_ implements the Zed program.

the flow implied by the pipeline yet reaching the same result &mdash;
much as a modern SQL engine optimizes a declarative SQL query.

For example, the query from above is more efficiently implemented as

> a boolean AND operation instead of two pipeline stages,

Author: George Boole will have really made it when we start using lower case.

so the compiler is free to transform it to
```
widget and price > 1000
```
And since the "AND" syntax is optional (logical AND can be expressed as
concatenation), this query can also be expressed as
```
widget price > 1000
```

To facilitate both a programming-like model as well as an ad hoc search
experience, Zed has a canonical, long form that can be abbreviated
using syntax that supports an agile interactive query workflow.
For example, the canonical form of an aggregation uses the `summarize`
keyword, as in
```
summarize count() by color
```
but this can be abbreviated by dropping the keyword whereby the compiler then
uses the name of the aggregation function to resolve the ambiguity, e.g.,
as in the shorter form
```
count() by color
```
Similarly, the canonical form of a search expression is a `filter` operator
(and the "AND" operator is explicit in canonical form),
so the example from above would be written canonically as
```
filter widget and price > 1000
```
Unlike typical log search systems, the Zed language operators are uniform:
you can specify an operator including keyword search terms, boolean predicates,

> etc using the same syntax at any point in the pipeline.  For example,

Author: comma here isn't right

the predicate `count >= 10` can simply be tacked onto the output of a
count aggregation using the filter from above and perhaps sorting
the final about by `count` in a simple to type and edit fashion:
```
widget price > 1000 | count() by color | count >= 10 | sort count
```
The canonical form of this more complex query is:
```
filter widget and price > 1000
| summarize count() by color
| filter count >= 10
| sort count
```

> ## SQL Compatiblity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## SQL Compatibility
```

To encourage adoption by the vast audience of users who know and love SQL,
a key goal of Zed is to support a superset of the data query language (DQL) portion

> of ANSI SQL.  For example, the above query can also be written in Zed as

Author: With this change, it reads a little strange but we can fix it later.

```
SELECT count(), color
WHERE widget AND price > 1000
GROUP BY color
HAVING count >= 10
ORDER BY count
```
i.e., this SQL expression is a subset of the Zed language.

> Naturally, the SQL and Zed forms can be mixed and matched:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Uniquely, the SQL and Zed forms can be mixed and matched:
```

Unless all the other languages mix SQL and non-SQL, it comes across to be more as a _unique_ differentiator rather than something that naturally follows. A _good_ differentiator, I think. 😉

Author: This doesn't read smoothly to me.  Perhaps "naturally" is too colloquial.  The intent here is "if you embrace this design philosophy of embedding SQL, then of course, you could mix and match Zed and SQL"
"Uniquely" as a parenthetical seems too obscure to me.  That requires more development or at least it should be the subject of a sentence, but it's not a point I was trying to make here.

Author: I'll just take it out

```
SELECT count(), color
WHERE widget AND price > 1000
GROUP BY color
| count >= 10 | sort count
```
While this hybrid capability of Zed may seem questionable, our goal here
is to have the best of both worlds: the easy interactive workflow of Zed
combined with the ubiquity and familiarity of SQL.

And because the Zed data model

> is based on a heterogenous sequence of arbitrarily typed semi-structured records,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is based on a heterogeneous sequence of arbitrarily-typed, semi-structured records,
```

the Zed language is often better fit here compared to SQL.  For example, an aggregation
that operates on heterogeneous data might look like this:
```
not srcip in 192.168.0.0/16
| summarize
    bytes := sum(src_bytes + dst_bytes),
    maxdur := max(duration),
    valid := and(status == "ok")
      by srcip, dstip
```

> This query filters out records in with `srcip` in network 192.168

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This query filters out records in which `srcip` in network 192.168
```

and computes three aggregations over all such records that have the `srcip` and `dstip`
fields where some record have a `status` field, other records

> have a `duration` field and yet other records have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
have a `duration` field, and yet other records have
```

`src_bytes` and `dst_bytes` fields.  Because Zed is more relaxed than SQL,

> you can throw together a bunch of related data of different types into a "data pool"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you can mix a bunch of related data of different types into a "data pool"
```

Author: intermix

without having to define any upfront schemas
&mdash; let alone a schema per table &mdash;
thereby enabling easy-to-write queries over heterogenous pools of data.
Writing an equivalent SQL query for the different record types implied above
would require complicated table references, nested selects, and multi-way joins.

> > NOTE that the SQL expression implementation is currently in prototype stage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** The SQL expression implementation is currently in prototype stage.
```

Just a formatting thing to make it look like the "Note:" blocks in the other docs.

> If you try it out, you may run into problems and we'd love your

> > feedback for where it breaks and how it can be improved.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> feedback.  Feel free to [open an issue](https://github.com/brimdata/zed/issues/new)
> or come talk to us on our [public Slack](https://www.brimsecurity.com/join-slack/)
> about where you've seen it break or where you think it can be improved.
```

## Data Sources

In the examples, above the data source is implied.  For example, the
`zed query` command takes a list of files and the concatenated files

> are the implied input.  Likewise, in the Brim app, the UI selects a
> data source and key range.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are the implied input.  Likewise, in the [Brim app](https://github.com/brimdata/brim),
the UI allows for the selection of a data source and key range.
```

Data sources can also be explicitly specified using the `from` keyword.

> Depending on the operating context, `from` make take a file path argument

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on the operating context, `from` may take a file path argument
```

> Depending on the operating context, `from` make take a file path argument
> relative to the local file system, an HTTP URL, an S3 URL, or in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Depending on the operating context, `from` may take a file system path,
an HTTP URL, an S3 URL, or in the
```

context of a Zed lake, the name of a data pool.

> ## Directed-acyclic Flow Graphs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Directed Acyclic Flow Graphs
```

While the examples above all illustrate a linear sequence of operations,
Zed programs can include multiple data sources and splitting operations
where multiple paths run in parallel and paths can be combined (in an
undefined order), merged (in a defined order) by one or more sort keys,
or joined using relational join logic (currently only merge-based equijoin
is supported).

> Generally speaking, a flowgraph defines a directed acyclic graph (DAG) composed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generally speaking, a [flow graph](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Directed_acyclic_graph) defines a directed acyclic graph (DAG) composed
```

of data sources and operator nodes.  The Zed syntax leverages "fat arrows",

> i.e., `=>`, to indicate the start of a parallel paths and terminates each

Reviewer: ```suggestion
i.e., `=>`, to indicate the start of a parallel path and terminates each
```

parallel path with a semicolon.

A data path can be split with the `split` operator as in
```
from PoolOne | split (
  => op1 | op2 | ... ;
  => op1 | op2 | ... ;
) | merge ts | ...
```

> Or multiple pools can be accessed and, for example, joined...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Or multiple pools can be accessed and, for example, joined:
```

```
from (
  PoolOne => op1 | op2 | ... ;
  PoolTwo => op1 | op2 | ... ;
) | join on key=key | ...
```
Similarly, data can be routed to different paths with replication
using `switch`:
```
from ... | switch color (
  "red" => op1 | op2 | ... ;
  "blue" => op1 | op2 | ... ;
  default => op1 | op2 | ...
) | ...
```

## Operators

Each operator is identified by name and performs a specific operation
on a stream of records.  The entire list of operators is documented
in the [Zed Operator Reference](operators/README.md).

> For three important and commonly used set of operators, the operator name

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For three important and commonly used operators, the operator name
```

> is optional as the compiler can determine from syntax and context which operator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is optional, as the compiler can determine from syntax and context which operator
```

is intended.  This promotes an easy-to-type, interactive UX
for these common use cases.  They include:

> * _filter_ - selects only the records that match a specified [search expression](search-syntax/README.md)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* _filter_ - select only the records that match a specified [search expression](search-syntax/README.md)
```

> * _filter_ - selects only the records that match a specified [search expression](search-syntax/README.md)
> * _summarize_ - perform zero or more aggregations with optional group-by keys
> * _put_ - add or modify fields to records

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `filter` - selects only the records that match a specified [search expression](search-syntax/README.md)
* `summarize` - perform zero or more aggregations with optional [group-by](grouping/README.md) keys
* `put` - add or modify fields in records
```

For example, the canonical form of
```
filter widget
| summarize count() by color
| put COLOR := to_upper(color)
```
can be abbreviated as
```
widget | count() by color | COLOR := to_upper(color)
```
as the compiler can tell from syntax and context that the three operators

> are a filter, summarize, and put.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are a `filter`, `summarize`, and `put`.
```

> are a filter, summarize, and put.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
are `filter`, `summarize`, and `put`.
```
